### **Course Overview and Prerequisites**

This course will introduce students to beginning and intermediate database concepts. Students will learn the structured query language, the design of data models, loading and normalizing data, how to query databases, and how to measure the performance of various ways of indexing and querying data.

This course has no particular "within MADS" prerequisites. Students should have a solid understanding of programming in Python and be confident in their Python skills.

### **Instructor and Course Assistants**

- Instructor: Dr. Charles Severance - csev@umich.edu
- Course Assistant: Graham Hukill - gshukill@umich.edu

### **Communication Expectations**

**Contacting instructor and course assistants** : Course channel in Slack

**Email response time** : 24 - 48 hours

**Slack response time** : Questions posted on the Slack Channel during the day will be answered by 11PM (Eastern) of the day.

**Office hours** : see _Course Schedule_ below

### **Textbooks**

This book is optional. There are many free online materials covering PostgreSQL that are quite sufficient. Students can get a free electronic copy of this book if they want additional descriptions of the concepts of this course.

1. (Optional) _PostgreSQL: Up and Running (A Practical Guide to the Advanced Open Source Database)_ , Regina O. Obe, Leo S. Hsu, ISBN-13: 978-1491963418, ISBN-10: 1491963417

### **Technology Requirements (unique to this course)**

_None - All of the work in the course can be done in the provided Jupyter notebook and terminal program. Students can also do the course work on their own computers with the installation of a free PostgreSQL client for their system. Students are provided with an internet-accessible PostgreSQL database server where all the homework can be done._

### **Accessibility**

[Screen reader configuration for Jupyter Notebook Content](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ct4BShNTYVU2J_oYeuTTsODSAFlEhtODXMlfc4-t5PM/edit?usp=sharing)

### **Course Outcomes**

1. Learn the SQL Language
2. Learn relational database design
3. Learn how to load and normalize data in databases
4. Learn how to add indexes for performance
5. Learn about stored procedures
6. Learn Regular Expressions for scanning, parsing, and extracting data

### **Course Schedule**

This course begins on **Tuesday, January 5, 2022** and ends on **Tuesday February 1, 2022.**

Weekly Activities, Quizzes, and Programming Assignments will be due on **Tuesdays at 11:59pm** (time zone = Ann Arbor, Michigan - Eastern Time).

Schedule of Weekly Office Hours via Zoom (time zone = Ann Arbor, Michigan - Eastern Time):

- please see the " **live events** " to see upcoming Office Hours. Charles Severance and Graham Hukill will also announce Office Hours on Slack.
- Charles Severance: Mondays 7-9PM at <https://umich.zoom.us/j/94003418514>
- Graham Hukill: Thursdays 8-9 AM, find meeting link from live events

  **Assignments and Percentage of Final Grade**

| Course Assignment                     | Percentage of Final Grade |
| ------------------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| Initial Server Setup                  | 6.25                      |
| Making Our First Tables               | 6.25                      |
| Inserting Data into a Table           | 6.25                      |
| Serial fields / Auto increment        | 6.25                      |
| Musical Database / CSV                | 6.25                      |
| Week 1: Quiz                          | 6.25                      |
| Entering Many-to-One-Data Automobiles | 6.25                      |
| Building a Many-to-Many Roster        | 6.25                      |
| Week 2: Quiz                          | 6.25                      |
| Musical Tracks Many-to-One            | 6.25                      |
| Unesco Heritage Sites Many-to-One     | 6.25                      |
| Musical Track Database Plus Artists   | 6.25                      |
| Week 3: Quiz                          | 6.25                      |
| Creating a Stored Procedure           | 6.25                      |
| Generating Text                       | 6.25                      |
| Week 4: Quiz                          | 6.25                      |
| Total                                 | 100%                      |

**Note: All assignments are required to earn credit for this course.**

### **Letter Grades, Course Grades, and Late Submission Policy**

Refer to the [MADS Assignment Submission and Grading Policies](https://www.coursera.org/learn/siads-orientation/supplement/9eHGY/mads-assignment-submission-and-grading-policies) section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to Student Orientation course required)

The course grade scale is as follows:

| Letter Grade | Percentage    |
| ------------ | ------------- |
| A            | 93% and above |
| A-           | 90% and above |
| B+           | 87% and above |
| B            | 85% and above |
| B-           | 77% and above |
| C            | 73% and above |
| D            | 70% and above |
| F            | Below 70%     |

Late assignments will be penalized by 20% times the number of days late.  Homework that is late 5 days or more will receive zero credit.

### **Academic Integrity / Code of Conduct**

Refer to the [Academic and Professional Integrity](https://www.coursera.org/learn/siads-orientation/supplement/CEdb0/master-of-applied-data-science-program-student-handbook) section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to Student Orientation course required).

While we offer a number of discussion channels to support your work, if you are stuck **you may not share or receive complete solutions to the assignments.** We also encourage you to support your classmates, but again, without sharing completed code. (Pointing to resources, describing ideas in pseudo-code, etc. is fine.)

### **Accommodations**

Refer to the [Accommodations for Students with Disabilities](https://www.coursera.org/learn/siads-orientation/supplement/mK9GT/accommodations-for-students-with-disabilities) section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the Student Orientation course required).

Use the [Student Intake Form](https://ssd.umich.edu/content/student-intake-form) to begin the process of working with the University’s Office of Services for Students with Disabilities.

### **Help Desk(s): How to get Help**

- Degree program questions or general help - umsimadshelp@umich.edu
- Coursera’s Technical Support (24/7) - <https://learner.coursera.help/>

### **Library Access**

Refer to the [U-M Library’s information sheet](https://www.lib.umich.edu/computing-library/access-outside-library) on accessing library resources from off-campus. For more information regarding library support services, please refer to the [U-M Library Resources](https://www.coursera.org/learn/siads-orientation/supplement/pED9d/u-m-library-resources) section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the Student Orientation course required).

### **Student Mental Health**

Refer to the University’s [Resources for Stress and Mental Health website](https://www.uhs.umich.edu/stressresources#services) for a listing of resources for students.

### **Student Services**

Refer to the [Introduction to UMSI Student Life](https://www.coursera.org/learn/siads-orientation/supplement/S6R1u/introduction-to-umsi-student-life-and-academic-affairs) section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the Student Orientation course required).
