## Syllabus Siads 632: Data Mining Ii Course Overview And Prerequisites

This course extends Data Mining I and introduces additional data representations and tasks involved in mining real world data, with a particular focus on sequence modeling, time series analysis, and mining data streams. It introduces how to extract patterns, compute similarities/distances of data, and make predictions under these data representations.

## Instructor And Course Assistants

Instructor: Noha Ghannam - nmghanna@umich.edu Course Support: Amanda Hardy (Co-Instructor) - amjaha@umich.edu

## Course Communication Expectations

- Contacting instructor and course assistant: Course channel in Slack - Email response time: 24 - 48 hours - Slack response time: 24 - 48 hours weekdays - Office hour sessions will be recorded for the benefit of students who are unable to join at
  these times. Password to join any Office hours is 632

## How To Get Help

If you have questions concerning the degree program, encounter a technical issue with Coursera, or issues using Slack, please submit a report to the ticketing system at umsimadshelp@umich.edu . If you have an issue specific to the Coursera environment, you can also begin a live chat session with Coursera Technical Support (24/7) or view Coursera troubleshooting guide s. (you may be asked to log in to your Coursera account). For questions regarding course content, refer to the **Communications Expectations** section below.

## Weekly Readings Or Textbook Information

- Speech and Language Processing (3rd ed. draft) Dan Jurafsky and James H. Martin. (
  Chapter 3 and Appendix Chapter A ).
- Data Mining: the Textbook , Charu C. Aggarwal. (Chapter 12 and Chapter 14).
  To access the required textbooks, simply click on the links above and login with your UMich LoginID and Password.

## Learning Outcomes

- Be able to formulate real world data as sequences, time series, or data streams. - Be able to formulate a real world problem as sequence prediction and solve it using
  N-Gram language models.
- Be aware of how Hidden Markov Models work. - Extract patterns from time series data, including trends, seasons, cycles, and outliers. - Measure similarity between time series. - Conduct time series forecasting using autoregressions. - Articulate the restriction of data streams and strategies for mining data streams. - Implement Reservoir sampling, Bloom filter, and lossy counting. - Name real world applications of these data representations and methods.

## Course Schedule

- **This course begins on September 27, 2022 and ends on October 23, 2022** .
- Weekly assignments will be due at two instances. Weeks 1 and 2 assignments are due
  at the end of week 2. Weeks 3 and 4 are due on the last day of the course. (Ann Arbor,
  Michigan time-Eastern Daylight Time - EDT, UTC -4).

## Weekly Office Hours Via Zoom (Ann Arbor, Michigan Time):

Your instructor will hold weekly, synchronous office hours using the video-conferencing tool, Zoom. The schedule of office hours can be found by clicking on the **Live Events** link in the left-hand navigation menu. Additionally, all office hours will be recorded and archived so that you can retrieve them at a later date. Archived office hours can be found in respective module of the course.

## Grading

| Course Item                   | Percentage of Final Grade | Due          |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------- | ------------ |
| Week 1 Programming Assignment |                           |              |
| Group                         |                           |              |
| 25% (40%, 30%, 30% per        |                           |              |
| assessment)                   |                           |              |
| Monday 10/9                   |                           |              |
| 11:59pm                       |                           |              |
| Week 2 Programming            |                           |              |
| Assignments                   |                           |              |
| 25% (50% per assessment)      | Monday 10/9               |              |
| 11:59pm                       |                           |              |
| Week 3 Programming Assignment | 25% (50% per assessment)  | Monday 10/23 |
| 11:59pm                       |                           |              |
| Week 4 Programming            |                           |              |
| Assignments                   |                           |              |
| 25% (50% per assessment)      | Monday 10/23              |              |
| 11:59pm                       |                           |              |
| Total                         | 100%                      |              |

Note: All assignments are required to earn credit for this course.

## Letter Grades, Course Grades, And Late Submission Policy

Refer to the MADS Assignment Submission and Grading Policies section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to Student Orientation course required).

For this course, all the weekly assignments are due at the end of the course. No submissions will be allowed after that due date. You can plan on your own to learn the contents and solve the assignments. Weekly office hours will mostly cover current week's assignments. The grading scale for this course is as follows:

| A        | 93%       |
| -------- | --------- |
| A-       | 90%       |
| B+       | 87%       |
| B        | 83%       |
| B-       | 80%       |
| -------- | --------- |
| C+       | 77%       |
| C        | 73%       |
| C-       | 70%       |
| D+       | 67%       |
| D        | 63%       |
| D-       | 60%       |
| F        | 0%        |

## Academic Integrity/Code Of Conduct

Refer to the Academic and Professional Integrity section of the UMSI Student Handbook. (access to Student Orientation course required).

## Accommodations

Refer to the Accommodations for Students with Disabilities section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the Student Orientation course required). Use the Student Intake Form to begin the process of working with the University's Office of Services for Students with Disabilities.

## Accessibility

Refer to the Screen reader configuration for Jupyter Notebook Content document to learn accessibility tips for Jupyter Notebooks.

## Library Access

Refer to the U-M Library's information sheet on accessing library resources from off-campus. For more information regarding library support services, please refer to the U-M Library Resources section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the Student Orientation course required).

## Student Mental Health

Refer to the University's Resources for Stress and Mental Health website for a listing of resources for students.

## Student Services

Refer to the Introduction to UMSI Student Life section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the Student Orientation course required).

## Technology Tips

- Recommended Technology - This program requires Jupyter Notebook for completion of problem sets and Adobe or
  other PDF viewer for reading articles.
- Working Offline - While the Coursera platform has an integrated Jupyter Notebook system, you can work
  offline on your own computer by installing Python 3.5+ and the Jupyter software packages, including pyspark. For more details, consult the Jupyter Notebook FAQ .
