
## Course Overview And Prerequisites

 Students will gain an understanding of how machine learning pipelines function and common issues that occur during the construction and deployment phases. Students will learn how to prototype, test, evaluate, and validate pipelines. By the end, students should be able to build an end-to-end pipeline for supervised machine learning tasks. 

 The prerequisites for SIADS 643 include: 

 -  SIADS 542: Supervised Learning -  SIADS 532: Data Mining I -  SIADS 632: Data Mining II 

## Instructor And Course Assistants

 Michael Hess, Solution Architect Lead and Adjunct Lecturer in Information Email:  mlhess@umich.edu Jungseo Aurora Lee, Graduate Student Instructor, School of  Information Email:  jungseo@umich.edu 

## Course Communication Expectations

 Please use slack for all communications. If slack is not working for you, or there is privacy concern, please email mlhess@umich.edu  directly. If you have a VISA form  please send it to  mlhess@umich.edu  in the first week  of classes. 

## Textbook Information

 Ameisen, E. (2020). Building machine learning powered applications: Going from idea to product. Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly Media. 

 You can search for this textbook on lib.umich.edu and find a copy of it online. Please seek out the help of a librarian if you have access issues. 

## Learning Outcomes

 -  Describe the flow of data within an enterprise. -  Explain software best practices for pipeline steps. 
 -  Describe functions of and use Git. 
 -  Build an end to end pipeline for supervised machine  learning tasks. -  Listen to industry experts on machine learning pipelines. -  Build and troubleshoot a machine learning pipeline. -  Run an end to end pipeline. -  Recognize common mistakes made in machine learning  pipelines. 

## Course Schedule -  This Course Begins On  Tuesday, October 24 At 3Am  Edt And Ends On Monday, November 20  .

 -  Weekly assignments will be  **due on Mondays at 11:59  pm**  (Ann Arbor, Michigan time-Eastern Time). 

## Weekly Office Hours Via Zoom (Ann Arbor, Michigan Time):

 The schedule of office hours can be found by clicking on the  **Live Events**  link in the left-hand navigation  menu. Additionally, most office hours will be recorded and archived so that you can retrieve them at a later date. Office hours recordings can be found in the respective week/module of the course. Passcode to join all office hours is  **643** . Office hours schedule  is below. 

## Michael Hess: Every Thursday 8-9 Pm Jungseo Aurora Lee: Every Wednesday 2 - 3 Pm Grading

|  Course Item                   |  Percentage of Final Grade    |  Due                                           |
|--------------------------------|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Monday 10/30 11:59pm           | Week 1                        | 20% (25% Quiz: Theia, 25% Test your git        |
| knowledge, 50% Re-usable Code) |                               |                                                |
| Monday 11/6 11:59pm            | Week 2                        | 25% (Creating the cleaning step of a pipeline, |
| Quiz: Pipelines)               |                               |                                                |
| Week 3                         | 25% (Building a pipeline)     | Monday 6/13 11:59pm                            |
| Week 4                         | 30% (Final project)           | Monday 6/20 11:59pm                            |
| Total                          | 100%                          |                                                |

 Note: All assignments are required to earn credit for this course. 

## Letter Grades, Course Grades, And Late Submission Policy

 If an assignment is submitted late, the assignment grade will be docked 10%. 

 The grading scale for this course is as follows: 

|  A    |  95%+    |
|-------|----------|
| A-    | 90%      |
| B+    | 87%      |
| B     | 83%      |
| B-    | 80%      |
| C+    | 77%      |
| C     | 73%      |
| C-    | 70%      |
| D+    | 67%      |
| D     | 63%      |
| D-    | 60%      |
| F     | 0%       |

## Academic Integrity/Code Of Conduct

 Refer to the  A cademic and Professional Integrity  section  of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to Student Orientation course required). 

## Accommodations

 Refer to the  A ccommodations for Students with Disabilities  section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the  Student Orientation course required). Use the  Student Intake  Form  to begin the process of working with the University's  Office of Services for Students with Disabilities. 

## Accessibility

 If you have accessibility issues with the material in this class, please reach out to the instructional team. 

## Student Mental Health

 Refer to the University's  Resources for Stress and  Mental Health website  for a listing of resources  for students. 

 Refer to the  Introduction to UMSI Student Life  section  of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the Student Orientation course required). 

## Technology Tips

 -  Working Offline 
 -  If you have an issue  with ongoing access to the coursera platform, and have docker running on your local 
 computer, please reach out to the instructional team for help getting setup offline. 