
## Course Syllabus For Siads 515: Efficient Data Processing Course Overview And Prerequisites

 This course will introduce students to the basics of the linux command-line interface, debugging concepts, basic algorithmic principles such as memoization, recursion, caching, and generators, as well as efficiency and code profiling. There are no prerequisites. 

## Instructor And Course Assistants

 Instructor : Chris Teplovs, Lecturer IV in Information  and Research Investigator, School of Information - VProv Academic Innovation - Faculty and Staff Course Lecturers : Joshua Haskins, Intermittent Lecturer,  School of Information Naga Sanka, Intermittent Lecturer, School of Information Kris Steinhoff, Intermittent Lecturer in Information, School of Information and Staff Software Engineer, Woven Planet Lea Wei, Intermittent Lecturer, Sc  hool of Information Elham Amini, Intermittent Lectur  er, School of Information 

## Course Communication Expectations

 If you have questions about course content (e.g. lecture videos, quizzes, or assignments), please use the class Slack channel to discuss with classmates and the instructional team. Instructor and course assistant response time to Slack messages will be within 24 hours. 

## Required Weekly Textbooks And Readings

 See the  Library's access instructions Opens in a  new tab  for the readings hosted by O'Reilly Online. 

 The Linux Command Line  Opens in a new tab  by William Shotts (Chapters 1-4 only) 

## Week 2: Iterators, Generators, Decorators Iterators And Generators

 Effective Python: 90 Specific Ways to Write Better  Python  Opens in a new tab  by Brett Slatkin 
 (Chapter 4. Comprehensions and Generators) 

## Decorators

 Head First Python, 2nd Edition  Opens in a new tab  Second Edition by Paul Barry (Chapter 10. 

 Function Decorators: Wrapping Functions) 

## Week 3: Debugging

 The Visual Python Debugger for Jupyter Notebooks  You've Always Wanted  Opens in a new tab by David Taieb Python Scope & the LEGB Rule: Resolving Names in Your Code Opens in a new tab  by Leodanis Pozo Ramos 

## Week 4: Complexity And Optimization

 A Common-Sense Guide to Data Structures and Algorithms  Opens in a new tab  by Jay Wengrow (Chapter 3) 
 Python Data Science Handbook  Opens in a new tab  by Jake VanderPlasw (Chapter 1, section 
 7: Profiling and Timing Code) 

## Learning Outcomes

 Familiarity with the linux command-line interface Understanding generators, memoizing and cacheing Debugging Efficient data structures Theory and measurement of complexity 

## Course Schedule

 This course begins on  **Tuesday, October 24th** , and ends on  **Monday, November 20th**  . Weekly  **assignments will be due on Mondays at 11:59  pm**  (Ann Arbor, Michigan time- Eastern Daylight Time - EDT, UTC -4). In  **Week 1** , you will be introduced to the linux command  line interface (CLI) and you will learn basic data manipulation techniques without having to use Python. In  **Week 2** , you will learn about iterators, generators,  decorators, caching, and memoization -- all useful techniques to improve the writing and execution of your code. In  **Week 3** , we will review some basic data structures,  learn to use advanced ones to help with data manipulation, and debugging techniques for data science. In  **Week 4** , we will discuss algorithmic complexity  and look at how we can use profiling to improve the efficiency of our code. 

## Weekly Office Hours Via Zoom (Ann Arbor, Michigan Time):

 Your instructor will hold weekly, synchronous office hours using the video-conferencing tool, Zoom. The schedule of office hours can be found by clicking on the  **Live Events**  link in the lefthand navigation menu. Additionally, all office hours will be recorded and archived so that you can retrieve at a later date. Archived office hours can be found in respective module of the course.  **Passcode is 515**  for all office hours. 

## Grading

|  Course Item    |  Percentage of Final       |  Due    |
|-----------------|----------------------------|---------|
| Grade           |                            |         |
| 25%             | Monday, October 30th, 2023 | Week 1  |
| Assignment      |                            |         |
| 25%             | Monday, November 6th, 2023 | Week 2  |
| Assignment      |                            |         |
|  25%       |  Monday, November 13th, 2023    |  Week 3    |
|------------|---------------------------------|------------|
| Assignment |                                 |            |
| 25%        | Monday, November 20th, 2023     | Week 4     |
| Assignment |                                 |            |
| Total      | 100%                            |            |

 Note: All assignments are required to earn credit for this course. 

## Letter Grades, Course Grades, And Late Submission Policy

 We realize that the occasional crisis might mess up your schedule enough to require a bit of extra time in completing a course assignment. Thus, we have instituted the following late policy that gives you a limited number of flexible "late day" credits. You have three (3) free late days to use during SIADS 515. One late day equals exactly one 24-hour period after the due date of the assignment (including weekends). No fractional late days: they are all or nothing. Once you have used up your late days, 25% penalty for each subsequent 24-hour period after the deadline that an assignment is late. For example, if the due date is 11:59pm Monday, with no late days left, penalties would be: 
 Before 11:59pm Thursday: 25% deduction Before 11:59pm Friday: 50% deduction Before 11:59pm Saturday: 75% deduction After 11:59pm Sunday: 100% deduction You don't need to explain or get permission to use late days, and we will track them for you. Note that resubmissions after the deadline will be counted as late submissions. The grading scale for this course is as follows: 

|  A    |  95%    |
|-------|---------|
| A-    | 90%     |
| B+    | 87%     |
| B     | 83%     |
| B-    | 80%     |
| C+    | 77%     |
| C     | 73%     |
| C-    | 70%     |
| D+    | 67%     |
| D     | 63%     |
| D-    | 60%     |
| F     | 0%      |

 Refer to the  Academic and Professional Integrity Opens in a new tab  section of the UMSI Student Handbook. (access to Student Orientation course required). 

## Accommodations

 Refer to the  Accommodations for Students with Disabilities  Opens in a new tab  section of the UMSI Student Handbook. Use the  Student Application Form  in Accommodate  Opens in a new tab  to begin the process of working with the University's Office of Services for Students with Disabilities. 

## Accessibility

 Refer to the  Screen reader configuration for Jupyter  Notebook Content Opens in a new tab document to learn accessibility tips for Jupyter Notebooks. 

## Help Desk(S): How To Get Help

 -  Degree program questions or general help - umsimadshelp@umich.edu -  Coursera's Technical Support (24/7) -  https://learner.coursera.help/  Opens in a new tab 

## Library Access

 Refer to the  U-M Library's information sheet Opens  in a new tab  on accessing library resources from off-campus. For more information regarding library support services, please refer to the  U-M Library Resources Opens in a new  tab  section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the Student Orientation course required). 

## Student Mental Health

 Refer to the University's  Resources for Stress and  Mental Health website Opens in a new tab for a listing of resources for students. 

## Student Services

 Refer to the  Introduction to UMSI Student Life Opens in a new tab  section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the Student Orientation course required). 

## Technology Tips

 -  Recommended Technology -  This program requires Jupyter Notebook for completion of problem sets and Adobe or 
 other PDF viewer for reading articles. 
 -  Working Offline -  While the Coursera platform has an integrated Jupyter Notebook system, you can work 
 offline on your own computer by installing Python 3.5+ and the Jupyter software 
 packages. For more details, consult the  Jupyter Notebook  FAQ Opens in a new tab  . 