Course Syllabus for SIADS 501: Being a Data Scientist
Course Overview and Prerequisites
This course introduces students to the process of data science, covering problem formulation, data acquisition, modeling and
analysis, and presentation and integration into action. Students will be tasked with understanding what data scientists do, and
reflecting on what special knowledge and skills, perspectives, and ethical commitments they want to bring to problems as data
scientists. Students will also be exposed, through interviews with practicing data scientists, to real problems they may also have
to work around or avoid, so it lightly foreshadows the rest of the program and students’ future in data science.
There are no course prerequisites.
Instructor and Course Assistants
Instructor: Aasakiran “Bobby” Madamanchi - amadaman@umich.edu
Instructional Staff:

- mechalms@umich.edu,
  Melissa Chalmers
  Communication Expectations
  Contacting instructor and course assistants: Direct message via Slack. Please include both @BobbyMadamanchi and
  @MelissaChalmers in these messages.
  Email response time: N/A (please communicate via Slack)
  Slack response time: within 24 hours
  Office hours: see Course Schedule below
  Required Textbook
  None
  Technology Requirements unique to this course
  None
  Accessibility
  Screen reader configuration for Jupyter Notebook Content
  Learning Outcomes

1.  Competency - Explain the four project stages as a framework for data science problems and solutions, including the goals
    and desired outcomes of each stage.
2.  Literacy - Describe the expertise, perspectives, and ethical commitments that data scientists may bring to each of the
    four stages.
3.  Literacy - Articulate a set of maxims that apply to each of the four stages and to data science projects as a whole.
4.  Competency - Create and maintain an environmental monitoring system for staying up to date on new developments in
    data science.
    Course Schedule
    This session begins on Wednesday January 5, 2022 and ends on Tuesday February 1, 2022.
    Weekly assignments will be due on Tuesdays at 11:59 pm (time zone = Ann Arbor, Eastern Time Zone, GMT-5).
    Schedule of Weekly Office Hours via Zoom (time zone = Ann Arbor, Michigan):
    ●
    Wednesdays (5:30-6:30pm) (See Live Events for weekly link) \*8:30-9:30PM not 5:30-6:30pm on Jan 5
    ●
    Saturday (10-11am) (See Live Events for weekly link)
    Access via Live Events from the course menu
    Grading
    Course Assignments
    Percentage of Final Grade
    Peer Feedback in weeks 2-4
    5% total
    Initial Drafts of Plan (Manifesto) Components in weeks 1-3
    5% each week
    Final Version of Plan (Manifesto)
    80%
    Total
    100%
    NOTE: All assignments are required to earn credit for this course.
    Letter Grades, Course Grades, and Late Submission Policy
    For general information, refer to the MADS Assignment Submission and Grading Policies section of the UMSI Student Handbook
    (access to Student Orientation course required).
    Our policy on grades for late submissions is a little simpler and works better with the mechanics of Gradescope: for each day that
    an assignment is late, a penalty of 10% of the assignment points will be assessed (not 10% of the points earned). For example, if
    an assignment has 20 points, the penalty will be two points per day.
    Gradescope will not permit late submissions. Any submission after the deadline should be sent to Melissa Chalmers on slack.
    Letter grades are calculated within Coursera as follows: A+ (97+); A (93-96); A- (90-92); B+ (87-89); B (83-86); B- (80-82); C+
    (77-79); C (73-76); C- (70-72); D+ (67-69); D (65-67); D- (60-62); E (59 or less). There is no rounding up or down (e.g. an 86.79 is a
    B).
    Regrade Requests Policy
    Graders may make mistakes. Gradescope has a system for regrade requests; please use it to request review of something.
    Regrade requests will be handled by a different grader. The entire question will be regraded, applying all elements of the grading
    rubric. Your grade could go up or down.
    Academic Integrity / Code of Conduct
    Refer to the Academic and Professional Integrity section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to Student Orientation course
    required).
    Accommodations
    Refer to the Accommodations for Students with Disabilities section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the Student
    Orientation course required).
    Use the Student Intake Form to begin the process of working with the University’s Office of Services for Students with
    Disabilities.
    Help Desk(s): How to get help
    Degree program questions or general help - umsimadshelp@umich.edu
    Coursera’s Technical Support (24/7) - https://learner.coursera.help/
    Library Access
    Refer to the U-M Library’s information sheet on accessing library resources from off-campus. For more information regarding
    library support services, please refer to the U-M Library Resources section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the Student
    Orientation course required).
    Student Mental Health
    Refer to the University’s Resources for Stress and Mental Health website for a listing of resources for students.
    Student Services
    Refer to the Introduction to UMSI Student Life section of the UMSI Student Handbook (access to the Student Orientation course
    required).
    Readings
    Note: You need a free O'Reilly learning platform account to access many of the readings. Create an account using your
    <uniqname>@umich.edu email address by visiting: https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/temporary-access/
    From the dropdown, select “Not listed? Click here.” Then enter your <uniqname>@umich.edu email address. O'Reilly will send
    you an account activation email. Click the embedded red button to activate your account. You now have free access to hundreds
    of titles. Start reading.
